Doc: Add how-to guides for Entra ID (#14925)
canonical/lxd: doc/howto/oidc_entra_id.md

In both cases, it is assumed that LXD has been initialized and is available remotely via the HTTPS API on port 8443 (see {ref}`server-expose` for instructions).
It is also assumed that you have access to an Entra ID tenant.

(oidc-entra-id-direct)=
## Using Entra ID directly (LXD UI only)

1. In your Entra ID tenant, go to `Applications > App registrations` in the left panel.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/1-app-registrations.png
    Entra ID App registrations
    ```

1. Click `+ New registration`. Then choose a name for the application (for example `LXD`).

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/2-app-name.png
    Entra ID set application name
    ```

1. Under `Redirect URI (optional)`, select `Public client/native (mobile & desktop)` and type:

        https://<your-LXD-hostname>/oidc/callback

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/3-redirect-uri.png
    Entra ID set redirection URI
    ```

1. Click `Register`.

1. In the configuration page for your new application, go to `Authentication`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/4-authentication.png
    Entra ID authentication
    ```

> 1. Scroll down to `Advanced settings`.Under `Allow public client flows`, toggle `Yes` and click `Save`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Scroll down to `Advanced settings`. Under `Allow public client flows`, toggle `Yes` and click `Save`.
```

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/5-public-client-flows.png
    Entra ID enable public client flows
    ```

1. In the configuration page for your new application, go to `API permissions`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/6-api-permissions.png
    Entra ID API permissions
    ```

1. Go to `Configured permissions` and click `+ Add a permission`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/7-add-a-permission.png
    Entra ID add a permission
    ```

> 1. Click `Microsoft Graph` in the right hand panel.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Click `Microsoft Graph` in the right panel.
```

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/8-graph-api.png
    Entra ID Graph API permissions
    ```

1. Click `Delegated permissions`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/9-delegated-permissions.png
    Entra ID Graph API delegated permissions
    ```

1. Select all `OpenId permissions`, then click `Add permissions`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/10-openid-permissions.png
    Entra ID OpenID permissions
    ```

1. Go to `Overview` and copy the `Application (client) ID`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/11-client-id.png
    Entra ID copy client ID
    ```

1. Set this as the client ID in LXD:

        lxc config set oidc.client.id <your-client-id>

1. While still in `Overview`, click `Endpoints` and copy the URL under `OpenID Connect metadata document`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/12-discovery-url.png
    Entra ID tenant discovery URL
    ```

> 1. Navigate to the URL that you copied, this will display some output in JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Navigate to the URL that you copied. This URL will display some output in JSON format.
```

   Copy the value for the `issuer` field, and set this in LXD:

        lxc config set oidc.issuer <your-issuer>

   Alternatively, execute this command:

        lxc config set oidc.issuer "$(curl <URL that you copied> | jq -r .issuer)"

You can now navigate to the LXD UI in your browser.
When you click `Login with SSO`, you will be redirected to Entra ID to authenticate.

(oidc-entra-id-keycloak-broker)=
## Using Keycloak as an Identity Broker for Entra ID

If you plan to use Keycloak as an identity provider for your production systems, you should follow their guide on [configuring Keycloak for production](https://www.keycloak.org/server/configuration-production).

> For this tutorial, it is assumed that Keycloak is available over HTTPS and that you have created a Keycloak realm with default settings.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this guide, it is assumed that Keycloak is available over HTTPS and that you have created a Keycloak realm with default settings.
```

1. In your Keycloak realm, go to `Identity providers`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/13-keycloak-identity-providers.png
    Keycloak realm Identity providers
    ```

1. Click `Microsoft`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/14-keycloak-microsoft.png
    Keycloak Microsoft provider
    ```

1. On this page, copy the `Redirect URI`.

>    Keep the tab open so that you can come back to this page to continue setting up Keycloak.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Keep the tab open so that you can return to this page to continue setting up Keycloak.
```

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/15-keycloak-broker-redirect-uri.png
    Keycloak broker redirect URI
    ```

1. In your Entra ID tenant, go to `Applications > App registrations` in the left panel.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/1-app-registrations.png
    Entra ID App registrations
    ```

1. Click `+ New registration`. Then choose a name for the application (for example `Keycloak`).

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/16-app-name-keycloak.png
    Entra ID App name
    ```

1. Under `Redirect URI (optional)`, select `Web` and paste the URL that you copied from Keycloak.
   Then click `Register`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/17-redirect-uri-keycloak.png
    Entra ID set redirection URI
    ```

1. Go to `Certificates & secrets` in your Entra ID tenant.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/18-certificates-and-secrets.png
    Entra ID certificates and secrets
    ```

1. Click `+ New client secret`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/19-new-client-secret.png
    Entra ID client secret
    ```

> 1. In the right-hand panel, click `Add`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In the right panel, click `Add`.
```

   Copy the value.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/20-copy-client-secret.png
    Entra ID copy client secret
    ```

    ```{note}
    After navigating away from this page, you will no longer be able to view or copy the secret.
    If you forget to copy it, you can delete it and create another one.
    ```

1. In the Keycloak identity provider configuration tab, paste the secret into the `Client secret` field.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/21-paste-client-secret.png
    Keycloak paste client secret
    ```

1. In Entra ID, go to `Overview` and copy the `Application (client) ID`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/11-client-id.png
    Entra ID copy client ID
    ```

1. Paste the value into the `Client ID` field in the Keycloak tab.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/22-paste-client-id.png
    Keycloak paste client ID
    ```

1. In Entra ID, go to `Overview` and copy the `Directory (tenant) ID`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/23-copy-tenant-id.png
    Entra ID copy tenant ID
    ```

1. Paste the value into the `Tenant ID` field in the Keycloak tab.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/24-paste-tenant-id.png
    Keycloak paste tenant ID
    ```

> 1. Follow steps 7 to 11 in the above tutorial.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Follow steps 7 to 11 in the above guide.
```

Reviewer: It's unclear what this means. Do you mean in the first guide, "How to configure authentication with Entra ID"? Can you link to it here?

Author: I've added a link :)

    Keycloak client name and ID
    ```

1. In `Authentication flow`, check the `OAuth 2.0 Device Authorization Grant` setting, then click `Next`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/28-keycloak-device-flow.png
    Keycloak device flow
    ```

1. In `Valid redirect URIs`, type `https://<your-LXD-hostname>/oidc/callback`, then click `Save`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/29-keycloak-redirect-uri.png
    Keycloak redirect URI
    ```

1. Go to `Realm settings`.

    ```{figure} /images/auth/entra-id/30-keycloak-realm-settings.png
    Keycloak realm settings
    ```

1. Next to `Endpoints`, click `OpenID Endpoint Configuration`.
   This will display some output in JSON format.
   Copy the value for the `issuer` field, and set this in LXD:

        lxc config set oidc.issuer <your-issuer>

   Alternatively, execute this command:

        lxc config set oidc.issuer "$(curl <configuration-url> | jq -r .issuer)"

1. Configure LXD with the client ID that you configured in Keycloak.

        lxc config set oidc.client.id <client-id>

You can now log in to LXD via the user interface or via the CLI.
LXD will redirect you to Keycloak to authenticate.

> A Microsoft logo will be displayed that will allow you to log in to Keycloak (and therefore LXD) with Entra ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Microsoft logo will be displayed that, when clicked, allows you to log in to Keycloak (and therefore LXD) with Entra ID.
```

> ```{warning}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Additional settings for using Keycloak in production
```

> Some additional settings should be configured in Keycloak for this to be used in a production environment.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These additional settings should be configured in Keycloak to use it in a production environment:
```

> These are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

1. Under `Realm settings > Login`, disable `Login with email`.
   This prevents users from logging in using any method that is not Entra ID.
1. Under `Realm settings > User profile`, edit the user profile attributes such that they cannot be edited by users or administrators.

>    These values should be pulled through from Entra ID.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   These values are pulled through from Entra ID.
```

Author: In hindsight I think I'll make a few changes to this last section because:
- These settings aren't general to Keycloak. They are extra settings that should be applied so that the user cannot e.g. change their email address from how it is defined in Entra ID. So they only apply if using a Keycloak realm as a broker for a single identity provider where you want keep all the details from that single provider.
- It is not an exhaustive list. There might be other settings that should be applied (I am not an expert).

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
